Now of course there are different ways of approaching that, what we'll always have to do though is we'll
have to manage our set filters in main.dart because that is the only place where we can in the end reach
both the FiltersScreen and also reach
the CategoryMealsScreen which is in the end where we need to pass our set filters.
So I want to manage my filters globally in here and in the state management module as I already mentioned
before, we'll learn about another approach that allows us to manage state that affects multiple pieces
in the app in a global place.
That's not the main widget here which always has the downside that the entire app will rebuild whenever
we change state here, even though it might not affect the entire app.
So here in my app, for the moment however, I'll have to manage all my state and therefore, I'll convert
this from a stateless widget into a stateful widget, just like that by using the refactoring tool.
Now up there, I want to store which filters the user set and I'll do this in a map with strings and boolean
values.
I'll name that map filters and I'll set an initial value here,
in the end I have keys which are gluten for example and I'll set all these values to false initially.
So that simply is my default setting for the filters
as we start the app just like that.
Now of course the goal is to update that map when the user sets the filters on the FiltersScreen.
Now we could update this with every switch the user clicks there, so that if I click here, we automatically
update our filters here in the main.dart file,
that would be absolutely fine but it's not the approach I want to use.
Instead, I want to make sure that the user has to click a button on the FiltersScreen which then updates
the filters here in the main.dart file. For that,
let's add a new method here in MyAppState, which won't return anything which I'll name set filters
and there,
I also expect to get a map with string keys and boolean values which I'll name filter data and as always,
the name of that argument is totally up to you.
Now that method should be called from inside the FiltersScreen,
let's say it should be called when the user there clicks a button in the appBar.
So in the FiltersScreen widget, I'll add actions to the appBar and I'll add an icon button there, where
I set the icon to icons, to an icon where I use icons save which is this save icon here and when pressing
this button, then I want to trigger this function which I'm just defining here in the main.dart
file. Now passing that function here to the FiltersScreen is pretty simple because the FiltersScreen
is configured here in the routes table,
so that's now an advantage of using named routes. When managing your state here in the main widget, in
the main.dart file,
then you have all your widgets that you load through routes be created here in that same widget in that
same file, so if you want to pass data there, like this property or this function here,
so the set filters function or a pointer at that function, you can do that. Here, to the FiltersScreen
constructor,
I can pass a pointer at my set filters function and now that's passed into the FiltersScreen and
available there.
So in the FiltersScreen, I can now expect that, I can expect a function which I'll name save filters
which is set through the constructor, so let's add the constructor here where I target this save filters
and now this function I'm passing in in the main.dart file is forwarded here into the filters screen and
is used there and therefore now here when pressing this button, I can refer to my widget because the reference
to that save filters function is stored in a property of my widget, not of the state but you learned
that you can reach out to your widget with the special widget property which Flutter gives you inside
of your state objects in your state classes.
So here I can reach out to the widget and then simply call save filters and not add parentheses but
instead again just point at it and pass it as a pointer to onPressed, at least for now,
that will soon change because I will need to pass some data to save filters but for now, that will do.
Now back in main.dart,
we now set up the connection between FiltersScreen and the main app here and we're able to call a method
defined here into MyAppState in the filter screen which is pretty awesome.
So now set filters is callable and later it will also get some data and then I want to use that data
to update my filters here. Therefore here we can now call set state and in set state,
I want to override my existing filters, so this property up there, with the filter data I'm getting because
it will have the same format,
it will be the exact same map, I will make sure that this is the case.
If you want to be really sure, you don't use a map here but a custom object, a model you create,
I'll take the more quick and dirty way of using a map here
where you of course then have to make sure you're using the same keys, for an object
you would get auto-completion by your IDE and extra type checking by Dart but for this scenario here,
a map should do and I'm then overriding my filters here with the filtered data I get here.
Now of course, we also have to make sure that we now adjust the meals we present to the user based
on the filter.
Now at the moment, the meals that are available here in category meals are fetch directly from the
dummy_data.dart file, that has to change,
instead I want to manage my available meals here in the main.dart file. So I'll add a list here, a list of meals
which I'll name available meals and as a default, that should be dummy meals and for that of course you
need to add an import to the dummy_data.dart file and again, I'll adjust this import path to be
./dummy_data.dart.
So now I import my meals here in the MyAppState or in the main.dart file and I use it here in the
MyAppState to initialize my available meals. Now meal is my model which I also need to import here to
be able to use it,
it's in the models folder, meal.dart and with that import added,
this works.
So when the app starts, my available meals is basically just a pointer at the meals I got here.
Now when I set a filter, I want to change that,
then I want to set available meals equal to dummy meals
but now I use where to filter the dummy meals and
then I convert this back to a list.
Now for filtering, we pass a function to where which receives every single meal and then has to return
true if we want to keep it
and false
if we want to drop it and now we have to go through all the filters we can set to decide whether a
meal should be kept or not.
Now we'll add that in a second but first of all, let's make sure that we now use the available meals
in our CategoryMealsScreen.
That means that again down there where we set up the route for category meals, we can forward available
meals and in the CategoryMealsScreen widget, we now just have to accept that.
So here, I'll add a new final property which is a list of meals which I'll name available meals and
then add the constructor of course and initialize available meals and now use widget available meals
down there instead of dummy meals.
So instead of dummy meals, I just use widget available meals and now the available meals are managed
in the main.dart file which is exactly how it should be because there I can now filter them because
that's also the place,
the main.dart file, where my filters are managed,
that's the global source of truth for the entire app. So we can get rid of the dummy data import
now in the CategoryMealsScreen and now back in the main.dart file, we can work on the filtering logic
up there. Now for filtering here,
I simply want to check all my filters with if statements here. So I can check filters, _filters
which is this property here and check if gluten is true.
So just this here is equal to equals true,
right,
so if you just have if filters gluten, that automatically compares it to true.
If that is set to true, we know that we want to exclude meals that do have gluten in it.
Now in our meal model, we see that we have isGlutenFree, isLactoseFree, isVegan, isVegetarian as
properties.
So if a filter is set for isGlutenFree, we only want to include meals that are gluten free. So we can
add another condition here and we check is this filter set
and if yes, then the second part of this condition is also evaluated, then we check is the meal gluten
free. If it is not,
hence the exclamation mark at the beginning,
then I know that I don't want to include it, so we can return false.
Remember that in this where method or in the function we passed where, we have to return false if we
don't want to include a certain item in the newly generated list and the newly generated list should
respect all filters.
Now therefore I check if a gluten filter is set and if it is, then if the meal I'm looking at is not
gluten free, I know I certainly don't want to include it,
I don't even have to check the other filters.
It's not gluten free,
I'm filtering for gluten free items,
I don't need to include this one and I'll repeat that same logic.
So if I have a filter for lactose set, then if my meal is not lactose free, hence the exclamation mark
in front of this check, I want to exclude it. The same of course for vegan, if I'm filtering for vegan and
my meal is not vegan, hence the exclamation mark, I want to exclude it. If I'm filtering for vegetarian
here and my meal is not vegetarian, hence the exclamation mark, I want to exclude it. That's my logic.
If I make it past all these if checks, then I know either I'm satisfying all these filters or no filters
are set and therefore I will return true to keep the meal I'm looking at in my available meals. That
was a lot of talking,
now we can finally wire it up and for that, we need to make sure that set filters receives a filtered
data map that looks like this map. So we can copy this map and go to the FiltersScreen and there, I'm
calling widget save filters. Now actually of course, I want to do this in a way such that I forward the
data I gather in here about which filters the user selected with these widgets on this page. So
I'll actually use an anonymous function here so that I can call widgets save filters myself,
like this and I want to pass my data to that.
So my selected filters, that's a map and the values for each of these keys here, the values are of course
the values I manage up there.
So for gluten, I'll set this equal to gluten free, what the user chose there and the same for lactose
free, for vegan and for vegetarian and then it's this selected filters data which I forward to save filters,
which in the end triggers that set filters method here in MyAppState. Let's give that a try, let's save
that all and do a full restart with the green arrow and as a default, no filters are set and let's now
set vegetarian as a filter and hit save here,
don't forget that, you need to save and then go to meals,
quick and easy and indeed you might remember that previously we had a burger in here and the burger
is not included anymore.
Now what we're not doing at the moment is if I go back to filters, I don't reflect my currently set filters
here,
so let's do that as a next step to finish up that filtering logic. Of course it would be nice to see
which filters we set here on the FiltersScreen and therefore we have to make sure that we don't always
initialize these with false values but actually with the values that are set here in the main.dart file
in MyAppState. So that means that I simply want to forward my filters here, my current filters to the
FiltersScreen.
So besides a pointer at the set filters method, I'll also forward the current filters and in the filters
screen, we can therefore get that data.
So here we'll get a map with string keys and bool values,
the current filters,
that sounds like a fitting name and that will be the first argument I get here,
the current filters. And now here, we should actually not initialize this with false or at least not keep
it set at false,
instead we can now use initState to really set our own initial state when this state gets created with
@Override and important, with super not initState
and now in here, we can override these values based on the values we get in our widget current filters
map and therefore for gluten, I'll set my gluten free value.
Now we can repeat that for lactose free, access the lactose key on the current filters map we're getting,
for vegetarian, access the vegetarian key and for vegan, access the vegan key
and now when this state is created which happens when this page is loaded, we initialize our values here
and therefore also our switches to match our currently set filters.
So back in the app here, I restarted it completely,
let me now again filter for vegetarian meals and save this,
never forget that. Go to meals, quick and easy, the burger is not there.
Now let's go back to filters here and we see that's also still saved.
Let's now also filter for gluten free meals and save this, go back to meals and now the spaghetti
are also gone as they should.
So this should right now all be working
and if we clear our filters here and save that, of course our other recipes are back.
So that's looking pretty sweet,
filtering works,
let's now work on the favorites.